oh yeah we'll just settle down okay
it's good to see you all and welcome
back to parametric equations I want to I
want to begin by by revisiting what I
talked about at the end of last lecture
because I didn't have enough time to
explain it in detail I talked about arc
length of curves and I wrote a formula
for the arc length and I wanted to tell
you a little more about how this formula
is derived
so we look at the at the piece of a
curve on the plane which is given by
just in parametric form and we look at
the segment of this curve for T between
alpha and beta so this point would
correspond to equal alpha and this point
would correspond to equal beta remember
we discussed last time that in the case
of areas it was important to keep track
of which end point was which and so we'd
have to go when we when we compute the
area we have to go from left to right
and it just might happen that the value
of T on the Left would be larger than
the value of T on the right so then we
end up with an integral where the limits
are kind of unusual you the lower limit
is larger than the upper limit but it's
no problem you know that if you have
such an integral is just minus of the
integral in which the limits a switch
they reversed so there is a subtle point
when you do areas when you do our
clients there is no there is no such
strategy it actually doesn't matter you
could put here T equal beta or T equal
alpha either way you will be going to
get a good for a good formula for it
okay so how do we find the arc length of
this curve the idea which in fact you
will find in many places in this course
and in all of calculus is to approximate
the curve by a union of small segments
like this so you break it into many many
pieces and then each of those segments
you want to approximate by by an
interval by a segment of a straight line
so that is a crucial idea of all
cultures because you remember we
discussed last time that lines are the
simplest curves so whenever you can
approach approximate well a curve a
general curve by segments of a line
you're doing well you are able to obtain
good results it's not a good idea to
approximate the entire curve by a
straight line segment because you see
that it looks very different from this
curve and the length of this would
certainly not be the same at the length
of this curve and in fact the curve
could be much worse in something it
would be much more Wiggly like this so
certainly the length does depend on the
shape of the curve however when we break
into small pieces each piece can be
successfully approximated back by a
straight line segment you know how these
days and you know there you have this
advertisements kind of sublime
advertising time I almost I almost feel
like yeah we should get the roller
placements and you know make some money
on this nice version especially at this
time you know time of financial crisis I
think University can do really well
given that we have hopefully a very
large worldwide audience for this
because what else people people want to
watch you know at home but multivariable
calculus come to think about it and not
just before they go to sleep so anyway
going back to this let's just blow up
one small segment of this curve so it
will look something like this that's
just one of those little guys and and
now we approximated by a straight line
okay
and so so then we approximate the length
of this segment by the length of the
straight line segment and that we can
easily compute from the Pythagoras
theorem this would be the déplacement
the delta air displacement in X this xx
displacement and Y and this would be
Delta L now I want to say that this is
for a particular segment and let's say
the segments will be numbered there will
be a segment number to 1 to n where n is
some large number say a thousand on this
picture is about 10 or so but you want
to you want to make many human break it
into many pieces
so this will be really delta X I and
Delta Y Delta Li and Delta Li defined by
Pythagoras theorem to be Delta X I
squared plus Delta Y I squared square
root and now so this is nice but I would
like to rewrite this in a slightly more
convenient form you will see why it's
more convenient I want to divide and
multiply by delta t i where delta t i is
the range of our parameter t from this
point to this point so what i do is i
divide by this and i also multiplied by
so you know so here i am dividing i have
a square root but each square and X
square I divide by delta T I so the net
result is that I'm dividing by delta T
it's like I'm dividing by Delta TI but
then at the same time I'm multiplying by
delta T I so the result is the same but
this form will be more convenient for us
and now the arc length of our curve
which is the sum of the arc length of
this little segment of the curve can be
approximated by the sum of the arc
length of the straight line segment so
we are going to get the sum of this
Delta Li with I going from 1 to n this
is to say that we have dealt along the
length of the first segment Delta L to
the length of the second segment and so
on up to the length of the end segment
Delta L N and I hope you remember this
notation from previous calculus courses
this means the sum summation of all
those pieces okay and so now so I
continue the formula and I substitute
this expression here so what I get is
the sum from 1 to N and here I put the
square root of Delta X I divided by
delta T I
squared plus delta y delta VI squared
delta t i and now the point eight so you
see this expression which it starts
approximating the length of the the
curve the finer the partition becomes
the more number n capital n becomes so
four thousand pieces you'll get a good
approximation four million pieces you'll
get even better approximation so in the
limit in the limit when n goes to
infinity this will actually give us give
us the arc length of the curve and this
sum this is called the sum is called the
partial sum and the integral is defined
as the limit of this kind of partial sum
and so if you if you remember how the
integral in one variable is defined and
this is really going to be an integral
in one variable because it's just the
summation in one variable so this is
going to be precisely what we call the
integral from t equal alpha equal beta
which are the endpoints of this
expression in which you substitute
instead of delta x delta t is substitute
df/dt this becomes well approximated in
the limit becomes equal to i mean it is
well approximated for finite n but
becomes equal to DX DT the derivative of
x with respect to t and likewise this
one becomes perhaps i should do it like
this and this one becomes v of y dt so
this whole thing becomes DX dt squared
plus dy dt squared DZ and that's the
formula which I wrote down at the end of
last lecture I explained it very quickly
so I didn't I skip this intermediate
steps about summation and taking a limit
but that's the formula we get by by by
doing this calculation if you will we
can write it down even more precisely
and remembering that X's is equal to a
function f of T
Y is equal to the function G of T so we
can write it as the integral from alpha
to beta square root of f prime of T
squared plus G prime of C squared so
that's a formula and and this is a very
it's a very representative example for
many other things which we will study in
this course because often times we'll
try to approximate things kind of we
will try to approximate various
quantities for curvy objects like curves
or surfaces by by some of the same kind
of quantities for straight objects like
straight line intervals or squares or
parallelograms and things like that and
inevitably we will end up with an
expression like this where you have a
summation over overall pieces in the
partition where you have some expression
involving your for your parameter in
this case C times delta T I and under
good circumstances and in this course we
don't really discuss the sort of the
subtle point here about what are the
conditions on the functions F and G but
let's just say good circumstances which
are known and well understood all the
functions which we will study in this
course will satisfy those conditions
under those conditions this sum in the
limit when n goes to infinity when
partition becomes more and more fine
becomes an integral like this and it's
very easy to read off the expression of
the integral from the expression of this
partial sum as you can see in this
example so this is a good guiding
principle for many other things that
come later
for example even in this chapter we
discuss also the area of the surface of
revolution and also in the Cartesian
coordinates and in polar coordinates and
the idea is always the same so I'm not
going to explain it each time I'm going
to sort of stress it here in this
particular example and I want to say
that in those other cases it's going to
work in a very similar way okay
but you know as always in math or in
other subjects there are two there are
somehow two parts of the story the first
part of the story is to get the formula
and here I give you an intuitive
derivation of the formula I give you a
rough explanation of why this formula is
true but once you derive this formula
you can sort of you can forget about
this reservation and you can just use it
so when you do homework exercises from
practical point of view you don't need
to remember every step of this
derivation I think it is worthwhile to
really to understand to think about it
and to understand how this thing work
not only for this particular example but
for other problems or questions which
will come next which will come in the
future but at the end of the day when
you do homework all you need to know is
the formula and you need to know how to
work with this formula so in this case
it's very easy to work with the formula
because normally you are going to be
given the permit ization or maybe you
have to find it yourself but once you
have the permutation you have the
formula just plug things in and you get
an integral what kind of integral well
you get a single integral that an
integral one variable right and so you
get something which was the subject
matter of a single variable calculus so
at this point you have to remember all
the tricks and rules that you learned in
math 1a 1b on how to compute integrals
in one variable this is not the subject
of this course right in other words we
already we use that information in this
course so what we've done here is we
have reduced the problem which arises in
multivariable calculus a problem which
involves two variables right x and y it
is a curve on the plane and we want to
calculate its arc length but what we
have done is we have reduced the problem
to a question and single variable
calculus and the question really is to
calculate an integral in one variable
and then how do you calculate our
integral well at this point you don't
need to know anything about math
multivariable calculus you switch back
to the single variable calculus and you
have at your disposal all kinds of
methods and tools and tricks that you've
learned before and so this is a good
time to to refresh your memory on this
on this right to go back and in your
notes or in the book
how how to compute those integrals but
this is this will be assumed we are not
going to dwell on this too much there
are some standard methods like change of
variables
you know like integration by parts and
things like that so you have to also
remember the antiderivative sort of
various signal metric functions for
example there are special functions like
exponential function logarithm and
things like that and so you just use
they just take that toolbox and of
single variable calculus and you apply
it here okay so in a way in this course
and in the homework and in the test it
is not our goal to test you know which
necessarily about 1 1 1 B in other words
I'm not going to give you very hard
integrals to work on but still the basic
method you have to know and even if it's
a simple integral you still need to know
some some basic methods to be able to
compute it all right so that that's
about about arc length and next we have
we have one more one more
calculation one more expression integral
expression which is not for the length
but it's for surface area namely surface
area area of the surface of a revolution
surface which means that we look at the
surface obtained by rotating
a curve about x-axis or y-axis let's
start let's look at first of the case of
x-axis so here again we have let's say
we have some curve a segment of a curve
between some points here a and B say and
we rotate it about the the x-axis so
what we get is let me actually make a
slightly that makes like a better
picture for you so we put the car and so
when we rotate each each point on this
on the curve makes a circle like for
example this this point makes a circle
and then this point also makes a smaller
circle because it's closer and the curve
itself it appears many times right so it
looks something like this and then here
also you have a circle here you have a
circle and so on so you get a kind of a
cylindrical looking picture in fact you
will get a cylinder if your curve war
were a straight line or segment of a
straight line parallel to the X barrel
l/2 them to the x axis so the simplest
mirror age again the simplest example
would be if you take this and then the
surface is just like this so this is a
kind of a kind of a Wiggly kind of like
a vise if you if you want to think about
it this way which is turned on its side
so you want to compute the area of this
of this object and a cylinder is one
example another example is actually
sphere because you can think of a sphere
as the surface of revolution of 1/2 half
a circle because
if you have if you start with half a
circle which which has the endpoints
precisely on the x-axis when you rotate
it you're going to get a skier so that's
the kind of a generalization of sphere
and cylinder at the same time so it's
kind of very useful to know what the
surface area is for instance this way
you can derive a formula for them for
the area of a sphere which is very
useful and so here the idea for again
there are two parts one is the revision
of the formula which kind of precedes in
a very similar way and here and the
second is using the formula once you get
the formula all you need to do is to
substitute the information you are given
and then use tools and methods from
single variable cultures so what is the
formula the formula looks like this
it is it is the integral from alpha to
beta 2 pi Y and then the familiar
expression which we have there for the
arc length okay and where does this
formula come from well it comes in
exactly the same way just like here I
have to I have to break everything into
small pieces and so a small piece would
be say I break on the curve into small
pieces and then for each for each small
piece I'm going to end up with a little
cylinder on the surface which looks like
this it's almost almost looks like a
cylinder and so I will approximate the
area of the cylinder by taking the
product of them of the arc length of
this curve in other words through the
height of the cylinder
and 2 pi times the radius of the circle
which is which is the circumference of
the circle as we discussed last time
right so this part this part comes from
the circumference for conference from
the circumference of the circle
and and this part comes from the arc
length of the length of the segment of
the curve so the form is not at all
surprising it's just a formula realize
it's very simple fact that if you have a
cylinder then the area of the cylinder
is just going to be equal to 2 pi times
the radius of the cylinder which in this
case the radius is why that's why you
get 2 pi Y times the length of the side
the length of the side and the length of
the side is the arc length that we
talked about so it's given by this
lightest formula that's how you get this
but once you get it and you substitute I
have on g4x X&Y and you get a single
single variable integral any questions
about this yes do you have to add this
other side ok good good question it
depends on what is being asked well let
me refer to let me repeat the question
the question is whether in calculating
this we have to add the areas of the top
and the bottom of this right that's the
question so it depends on what is asked
if you are asked to calculate sort of
inta that if you are if you are told
that you have to look at the figure
which is which includes both the surface
over the revolution and the top on the
bottom and you're asked to calculate the
area of the whole thing then you have to
take the sum of three terms one is given
by this integral and that is strictly
speaking the area of revolution the area
of revolution by itself does not include
top and bottom but if you're asked you
can add those to peace as well any other
questions yes
I'm sorry what if you rotate it in
something beside the axis right that's a
very good question so here I talked
about rotating about the x axis but in
principle we could rotate well the next
level would be to look at rotate around
the y axis right but the former would be
very similar would be instead of 2 pi Y
we'll get 2 pi X but now the question is
suppose that it's rotated about a
different axis which is neither neither
of this two but some some other axis
like this
well in this case the formula could also
be adapted and but to really do it
justice to this you have to you have to
know the general rules for changing
variables and there are linear linear
transformations that's the subject of
math 54 so in this course we're not
going to we're not going to focus on
this kind of questions rotation around
around around lines other than the
coordinate axis but in principle you
could and the way roughly speaking you
do it is by making a transformation of
the whole picture by rotating the
picture so that that line becomes one of
the coordinate axis and then doing the
calculation using the formula that we
got there wasn't one more question you
are do you still have a question same
question ok good ok one more
why does this formula use the both of
them the this formula in a special case
when X is T and y is equal to f of T
which is as we discussed the case of
graph of a function y equals f of X this
formula becomes the old formula which we
had in a single variable calculus so it
is really a generalization okay so let's
move on so to the next subject and the
next subject is polar coordinates now up
to now we have we have studied after now
we have studied various questions about
curves and in all of this discussion our
initial point was a certain
parameterization of this curve in other
words an expression for both x and y
coordinates of points which are on this
curve as functions of an auxiliary
parameter T so what are what are x and y
here x and y refer to the coordinates of
the point so we are using here a way to
parameterize points on on the plane by
pairs of numbers x and y by their
coordinates and as i said already the
first lecture you should think of this
as a way of addressing those points in
other words you can think of this is as
a unique address of this point amongst
all the points on the plane the system
of coordinates x and y is called the
cartesian coordinate system in honor of
french
petitions laws for decart but in fact
there are other systems of coordinates
which in many situations are more
convenient and more useful than the
Cartesian system of coordinate and the
typical example of a different
coordinate system is the polar
coordinate system which we are going to
talk about now okay so what is the polar
coordinate system a polar coordinate
system is a different way to assign an
address to talk to a given point on the
plane and it is defined by different
rule so what is this rule do it here so
the rule is instead of instead of
projecting a point onto the x and y
coordinates I still draw those
coordinates because just because kind of
contribute to the fact how deeply
entrenched the Cartesian coordinate
system is in our mind because kind of I
kind of said it's likely you know it's
like formatting you think about it the
formatting a disk the point doesn't have
any coordinate system but I kind of like
to draw it to just indicate that we are
viewing it as a plane on which we are
going to draw curve and do it and do
various mathematical calculation however
given a point now we are not going to
assign to it an address by by dropping
perpendicular lines onto X and Y axis
the way we did before but instead we
will measure different characteristics
namely we will measure the distance to
the origin
okay and so we will call this our we'll
call this our now if we just measure
this that's not going to that's not
going to give this point a unique
address because there are many points on
the circle for which the distance to the
origin is equal to R in fact we know
precisely what the set is this is the
circle of radius R so they're way too
many what we are striving to do on the
other hand is to find a way to assign to
each point a unique address so just
measuring this by itself is not going to
help us we need additional information
and what gives us the additional
information which already uniquely
determines the point is the angle which
with this segment connecting the origin
and our point makes with the x-axis
let's call this angle theta so now you
see as I said the set of all points
which are which have distance R to the
origin is the whole is the entire circle
but within that circle there is only one
point for which the angle is going to be
a particular angle theta so now we pin
down this point in a unique way once we
know these two numbers R and theta and
this is called the polar coordinates so
the civil there are several questions
here first of all why do we need another
coordinate system to begin with why
can't we be satisfied with the original
coordinate system the dekat the
Cartesian coordinate system and the
answer to this is that oftentimes if you
use the traditional the Cartesian
coordinate system you end up for example
with various type of various types of
integrals and these integrals are going
to the single variable integrals like
this for arc length or
surface area and sometimes they're just
too hard and even if you are you had an
A+ on 1b and you won't be able to pick
get a number out of it
so even if you apply all the tricks you
you still unable to solve it and so
often times there is a you should try a
different approach and so oftentimes the
same quantity can be expressed as a
different type of integral right and and
in a way to get to a different type of
integral is to use a different
coordinate system and polar coordinates
turns out to be very convenient in many
cases and in many cases it simplifies
the answer it simplifies the kind of
integrals that we get in fact just a
couple minutes ago we discussed the
question of rotating around a different
line you see if we were to try to tackle
this question by using just the x and y
coordinates we would not we would get
nowhere it will be very difficult what
what I mean to say is that suppose that
we were asked to rotate a curve not
around this axis but around this axis
you know it's a legitimate question and
so the answer to this question the
correct answer is to realize that in
fact in addition to this coordinate
system XY that I kind of draw without
thinking on the board has as much right
to exist as a different coordinate
system which is obtained by rotating
this one by a small angle in which will
have two different axis which I drove
was pink with pink chalk so this one I
call X Prime and this one I would call Y
Prime and once you translate it to this
coordinate system the question becomes
exactly identical to the question which
we discuss now right so this already
makes you appreciate the fact that first
of all there is not a unique coordinate
system on the plane so it's an illusion
that there is a unique coordinate system
because the way I draw it I draw the
horizontal line sort of parallel to the
floor right but if I kind of tilt my
body a little bit then it will be like
this and also to the floor right so it's
not a good it's not a good reason and so
this tells you already there is a whole
variety of courses each can be read by
rotating all of those coordinate systems
though have the same flavor they have
all conceived
Gordon systems they just rotate it one
from respect to another by certain angle
this one is sort of radically different
but this is already a good illustration
that you should not be stuck with the
particular coordinate system that often
times to get to get an answer or to get
a good solution or to get a better
approach to your problem it is
advantageous to try a different
coordinate system so here we try
something which is which is different
and the advantage of this is that
equations of curves simplify of certain
core curves
simplify when you use this coordinate
system and of course the party the curve
from which the equation simplifies is is
the Circle Circle Circle
I recall can be parametrized using the
traditional Cartesian coordinate system
in the following way we write X is
cosine T and Y is sine T that's not too
bad but she were using two telemetry
functions but by the way this is for a
circle of radius of radius one but if
you want the circle of radius R let's
call
maybe R capital to distinguish it from
the other so the circle of radius R for
example circle of radius 5 would have X
5 cosine T and y 5 sine T that's not too
bad by this as santa grammatic functions
which are not is not kind of not
elementary functions on the other hand
in polar coordinate system the equation
we could can try to write equations for
this curve as well for the circle as
well using this new coordinate system
and the equation will simply be R equals
R so this is in polar coordinate system
so it's the same curve the circle but
represented in two different coordinate
system here we use cosine and sine here
we use nothing it's just Article R
equals equal to R catechol keep in mind
that here the small R and the big R play
completely different roles this R is the
code is
is one of the two polar coordinates this
is a coordinate like X or Y and this R
is a number because I'm asking you to
write to write the equation for for the
circle of radius R so for example the
number which could be equal to any
number you want like five for example so
in this case the equation would read
just R equals five so if this type of
equations that we get when looking at
the circle from the point of view of
polar coordinates and surely this is a
much simpler equation than this one
it doesn't involve sine or cosine it
definitely will involve it doesn't book
any function of anything but a constant
function Phi for R in general so that's
that's a good illustration of the
advantages of this coordinate system the
equations for some important curves like
a circle simplify and and and for this
reason also various integrals that you
get if you try to calculate the arc
length the surface area and so on will
also simplify it so that's the first
point why do we need this coordinate
system it's useful in applications the
second question we can ask is how to
convert one coordinate system into
another because let's say okay I
convinced you that this is a very useful
coordinate system and suppose you are
given called a curve in the Cartesian
coordinate and you you would like to
translate this into the polar coordinate
system or maybe maybe conversely you are
given something in a polar coordinate
system you won't translate back into
Cartesian so you need some tools a kind
of a dictionary how to go from one
coordinate system to the other and
that's actually done in a very
straightforward way you just have to
express the coordinates x and y in terms
of r and theta and conversely you have
to express R and theta in terms of x and
y once you do that you have a dictionary
which will enable you to go between the
stood for in the systems very easily so
the dictionary
it's very simple for this we need to
remember how the x and y coordinates are
obtained so this is the X and this is y
and so now we see very clearly how to
how to find what x and y are because x
and y added a to sides of this triangle
in which one of the angles is 90 degrees
or PI over to the right angle and
another angle is Theta so for such a
triangle we can find the length of the
side by taking the length of the long
side and multiplying by cosine and sine
of theta so therefore we get this
formulas F is R cosine theta and Y is
our sine theta right so that's it it
what would what does it mean it means
that if you are given a point represent
it in polar coordinates by two numbers R
and theta you can find the XY
coordinates of this point for example
let's say let's say theta is and this is
a let's look at this example let's say
theta is pi PI over 4 45 degrees and R
is 2 okay so so this is 2 this is PI
over 4 right so then you can ask what is
what is x and y say 2 and PI over 4
you have to take 2 times cosine theta
and cosine theta is 1 over square root
of 2 so it's going to be 2 over square
root of 2
and likewise sign in this case sine and
cosine are the same so you end up with
square root of 2 square root of 2 a very
simple rule so that's one way what about
the other way if you want to go from XY
coordinates to our theta coordinate
well in this case we are given the short
the two sides like this and we need to
find the lengths of the long side and we
also need to find the angle and of
course we can do that because we can use
Pythagoras theorem for the first one so
we get R is the square root of x squared
plus y squared and theta
find theta we have to find it what we
can find is the tangent of theta the
tangent of theta is going to be the
ratio between this side and this side so
instead of writing with theta is I'll
just write that as a tangent of theta
and that's why over X and once you know
the tangent of theta you should be able
to to find what theta is so at this
point actually we have to address one
question which I kind of swept under the
rug which is what are the possible what
is the possible range for R and theta
what are the possible values for R si
so because if we want to if you want to
study this if you want to use it as a
bonafide a coordinate system we better
we better know we had better know what
are the possible values of the
coordinates so what are the possible
values of R and theta
before entering this let's ask what are
the possible values of x and y is also
legitimate question
we never asked it because it's sort of
it was sort of a given that both x and y
can take arbitrary values when I say
arbitrary any real number from minus
infinity to plus infinity for X likewise
for Y because we assume that when we
talk about the plane we talk about the
infinite plane not just this blackboard
but the infinite plane which is obtained
by exchanging this blackboard in all
possible directions right so XY
the range is for x and y are from minus
infinity to plus infinity not so for the
polar coordinates right for one thing
our was defined I was defined as the
distance from the origin and the
distance is a positive number or more
precisely it's a non-negative number it
could be 0 or positive so our in this
definition is greater than or equal to 0
ok what about theta theta is the angle
and we know that the angle goes from 0
to 2pi so it is wide to say that
actually theta takes values between 0
and 2pi because if we start looking at
theta if we allow theta greater than 2pi
or less than 0 what will happen is that
will sort of get double billing we will
will will will get different ways of
representing the same point right
because will be the same point for
example the PI over 4 but also 2 pi plus
PI over 4 or 4 PI plus PI over 4 and so
on
and when I was telling you about this
system one of the important properties
that we wanted it to satisfy was that it
gives us a unique address to to a given
point so if we allow theta to take
arbitrary real values there will be
infinitely many ways to represent the
same point because we could always then
shift theta by 2 pi and we'll get the
same point so that's why it's better to
to specify the range of theta as being
from 0 to 2 pi if we want to be pedantic
we should also realize that actually 2
pi is like zero and so once you get back
to once you get to 2 pi it's like you're
back at zero so so you don't want to use
the same angle twice even if it's just
one angle so strictly speaking has to be
from zero less than greater than or
equal to zero but less than 2 pi so this
is how it's defined how it should be
defined in order to get sort of an
ambiguous answer and even then we
actually do have a small ambiguity I
kind of put it in brackets because it's
really kind of a subtle point which we
are not going to dwell on too much but
there is a small ambiguity there is no
ambiguity if R is equal to 0 if R is
equal to 0 we are actually at the origin
and so theta becomes meaningless we
can't really say and at what angle our
point is with respect to the origin
because it is the origin so so if R is
equal to 0 unfortunately my board which
doesn't look so good so might even look
like theta now I mean zero really if R
is 0 then theta is not determined
so there is a subtle point that when I
promise you that polar coordinate system
gives you a unique address assigns a
unique address to each point is not
exactly it's not strictly speaking true
it does assign a unique address to all
points except the origin for the origin
the address will be the article zero and
phase that could be anything so there
are too many addresses if you assigned
to that point but because it's only one
point we're not really going to worry
about it too much so I'm just mentioning
it to you so that you are not sort of
startled by this when you realize it it
is a fact but it's not going to be probe
to be a big problem for us just because
it's only one point which could which is
potentially problematic now there is
kind of a more important point here
which is that in fact we are going to we
are going to allow where we're going to
allow in our calculations we are going
to allow more values for for R and theta
we will allow and this is very technical
thing what I write here is how the polar
coordinates are defined strictly
speaking if we want to define an
unambiguous say for this origin
unambiguous coordinate system but in our
calculations it will be very convenient
to have a certain rule and to allow
points with negative R so if it's a rule
of convenience really the rule of
convenience is that if that if you have
negative R if R is negative we will
allow we will allow negative R
with the following interpretation
negative values so far
instead of explaining it in words I'll
just do a picture because it will it's
much easier to see that one than to hear
it ten times many of you probably
already know that who have already tried
to do the homework exercise for this
chap for this section the rule is like
this that if you have a point like this
R theta then it's mirror image it's the
somatic the point which is obtained on
the other side of this line will be
called minus R theta minus R theta plus
PI plus PI right right so we'll have
will follow this rule that negative R so
if R is positive you have this point but
then a point with negative R it's going
to be a point for which for which the
which lies on the opposite end of this
line of the of this line which is
symmetric to this point good I'm glad so
okay correct me what's that
right that's right exactly so if R is
negative then let's say you let's say
you're given points minus tan and then
PI over 4 okay so where would we plot it
okay so if it was 10 PI over 4 clearly
it would be somewhere here right but if
it is so the way I the way I wrote it is
not is not a good way so let's just let
me just give an example using a
particular particular values of r and
theta so this is this is the
representation for our theta if R is
positive let's let's put it this way if
R is positive this is a representation
okay and if R is negative then the
representation if R is negative then it
will be minus our theta plus like this
so that's what I meant in this picture
but it was a little bit ambiguous so in
particular if you have 10 PI over 4 it
will be here but minus 10 PI over 4 will
be here this isn't going to be the point
PI over 4 which will be the same as 10 +
3 pi PI plus PI over 4 ok like this yeah
when you when you write it it's not
clear when I say minus R do I mean the
original one or the - of the - of the
negative one I mean - of the negative
one so it's not the same R is this one
if R is positive R theta is just formed
like this and if R is negative let's
just do it like this if R is negative
then you take in other words here you
take the length R and if R is negative
you take the length negative R which
will be now positive and you take the
angle which is Theta / 5
I think it's pretty I think it's clear
now okay it's a yes you have to explain
it have to exploit you have to be
careful when you explain let me try to
explain it but we'll see if now in a
calculation so you will you will see
much better what I'm talking about
all right so let's see what we can do
now with this coordinate system
everything all right yeah I getting
tired and just Thursday Thursday
afternoon and you're excited about the
long long weekend yeah well we still
have half an hour but okay let me take
two but afterwards you go so let me let
me actually let me just take a
two-minute break just to relax a little
bit I want to tell you something it
doesn't mean that you should start all
stop choice you have to listen to me
here's my time so I want to tell you
about an article I read today in a
Forbes magazine not that I read Forbes
magazine regularly don't get the wrong
idea I saw it on a I saw it mentioned on
them on a blog and put a link to this
article that's why I read it it's
available electronically and it's a very
interesting article about string theory
and about the controversy about string
theory and I'm interested in this
because it's not very far from my
research interests which involve quantum
field theory and mathematical aspects of
quantum field theory but I like this
article because remember in the first
day when I said that you know people
think of mathematics and science as a
kind of something which has been you
know written in stone and haven't
changed in many years which in fact was
not true and this article is very good
illustration and I even I even quoted a
quote I covered a sentence on this
article from the very beginning which i
think is written very nicely so here oh
he writes he also writes why people tend
to regard science as the lofty temple
inhibited by serene spa
like wise men working scientist though
will tell you it's more like a stock
market full of fads and fashions booms
and busts so so I like this analogy and
not so much not so much I don't like it
if you see it's not the meaning it's not
to say that it's as speculative for the
stock market but I think it's a good
illustration of the fact that it is
really live organism which is constantly
changing like the stock market so in
that sense I think it's a good analogy
and because it's Forbes magazine of
course they use that analogy that makes
a lot of sense just like stock market
you know goes up and down and things
change likewise in science mathematics
and physics things also go up and down
and certain things become fashionable
and then they fall out of fashion and at
the end of the day it's the fundamentals
which you really care about not that the
speculation and not sort of the you know
artificial about artificial things so I
think that it's really cool and I really
like this this analogy with the stock
market and I I really recommend this
article it's very short and it sort of
talked about one of the most interesting
ideas of the last maybe 30 years in
science the string theory so I'm going
to put a link to this article on the bee
space on our bit space page and if you
come across any article about math or
science which you would like to share
with other students please send me the
link and I'll post it as well okay all
right now back to the boring stuff I'm
kidding it's actually a it's not boring
at all so I maybe some other day another
day we'll take a break we'll take a
small break and I'll tell you a little
bit about what string theory really is
okay but but now let's go back to let's
go back to polar coordinates all right
so let's look at let's look at various
curves and and at how to represent those
curves using polar coordinates so we
already talked about we already talked
about the circle circle of radius R is
represented by by the equation R equals
R where R is the polar one of the two
polar coordinates and this is radius so
here's another example a line passing
through the origin with angle theta to
the x-axis also given by a very simple
equation namely now theta is a constant
angle theta 0 say what I mean to say is
[Applause]
what I mean to say is that this line
this line which forms angle theta0 to
the x-axis is described by the equation
theta equals theta 0 in the first
equation articles R theta is arbitrary
well not exactly
arbitrary as we saw it should really be
between 0 and 2pi
but in this equation R is arbitrary both
positive and negative so in fact this is
the reason why we introduced this rule
which may look strange at first sight
because remember as I said at the
beginning the sickly speaking R should
be non-negative for if we follow the
definition of polar coordinates in which
R is just the distance so it has to be
non-negative but if we were to adopt
this point of view then the equation
theta equals theta 0 would actually
Chris pond note 2 this entire line but
only to half a line a kind of array
which goes from the origin to infinity
which is fine it's a fine geometric
object and so on on its own right but if
we adopt this rule if we allow our to be
negative and we plot points with
negative arts the way the way we just
discussed then not only half a line will
be represented in this equation which
would correspond to positive R but also
the entire line the second half a line
will crisp on two negative values of R
so so this is the advantage of this rule
that if we fold this rule then we have a
nice representation by an equation of
the entire line like this and not just
half a line ok ok what else we can we
what else can we learn from equations
with polar coordinates
so I want to look at at a couple of more
complicated example I'm sorry what is
arbitrary why is it arbitrary this
whenever the question is why did I say R
is arbitrary because when I write this
equation R is not to be fun it's nowhere
to be found in this equation right so
the meaning of this equation is we look
at all points on the plane whose theta
coordinate is fixed it is equal to theta
0 theta 0 could be any number between 0
and 2pi like PI over 4 PI over 3
whatever whatever we want any real
number between 0 & 2 pi so theta is
fixed but R is arbitrary when I write
this equation because this equation does
not involve our this equation means that
our can take arbitrary values within the
allowed range the allowed range
initially was stipulated to be R greater
than 0 may be R greater than R equal to
0 but eventually we decided that will
allow negative values of R so so that's
why well actually maybe it's better to
write like this and on this line we
actually see the part corresponding to R
greater than 0 our crisp on the part
corresponding to R less than 0 and there
is one point which corresponds to R
equals you likewise when I write this
equation
when I write this equation what I'm
saying is that I look at all points on
the plane for which the R coordinate is
fixed it's equal to some number capital
R which could be 5 10 13 whatever you
want but because theta does not appear
in the equation it means that theta is
arbitrary within the allowed range of
theta and what is allowed range the
allowed range here is from 0 to 2pi so
that's the meaning of this
okay now let's go back to let's look at
more complicated examples so see R
equals cosine theta so again a perfectly
legitimate equation involving the two
polar coordinates R and theta
in other words we're looking at all
points on on the plane for which for we
whose R and theta coordinates ideally
are constrained by this relation it's
like writing in the case of in the case
of Cartesian coordinates writing an
equation x squared plus y squared equals
1 it's one equation involving our two
variables x and y likewise this is also
one equation involving our two variables
R and theta we have now switched to the
polar coordinate system so the question
you can be asked is to draw this with
what does it to see what this curve
represents and in this case actually
it's easier to to understand what this
curve represents by switching back to
the Cartesian coordinates this is not to
say that this equation is useless in
fact on the contrary you can you can
then use this equation to compute
various things about the curve as
opposed to the equation in Cartesian
coordinates
but first we want to visualize it like
what does it mean and here we have to go
look back at the dictionary at the
formulas expressing the polar
coordinates in terms of the Cartesian
coordinate and so we could just write
our square root of x squared plus y
squared equals cosine theta and then but
we know tangent theta so it's a little
bit thick so it's not clear how do we
how do we get a good formula okay so it
doesn't work so let's look instead at
the geometry of this picture so then
let's see what cosine is cosine theta
what is it in terms of x and y well it's
better to say not in terms of x and y
but in terms of x and r right because
this length is X this length is y and
this length is R so the cosine theta is
the ratio of this side to this side
that's why cosine theta is X divided by
R now let's substitute this in this
formula so we get R equals x divided by
R and now we can multiply both sides by
r so we get R squared equals x okay and
now is a good time to express R squared
in terms of x and y because remember R
squared is x squared plus y squared so
we substitute here and so the result is
x squared plus y squared equals x and
this is already much more manageable
let's take X to the left-hand side
and let's complete the square we can
write x squared minus 2 times 1/2 2
times X times 1/2 plus 1/2 squared and
then so I I introduced it introduced an
additional term 1/2 squared which is 1/4
on this side and to compensate for this
I also introduce it on the right hand
side so that I get through the quality
and of course I shouldn't forget y
squared as well you see so I just put
two additional terms on the left and
right hand side which is 1 1/2 squared
but if I do that then the first 3 terms
combine into squares first returns give
you X minus 1/2 squared plus y squared
equals 1 cross and and then the result
end result is already an equation which
is familiar the end result is X minus
let me use a different job so we get X
minus 1/2 squared plus y squared equals
ok yes ok this was way this was by way
of simplified
making things easier for you but I guess
maybe I didn't achieve that goal 2 times
1/2 is 1 right so that's why I wanted to
write it you know I wanted to use the
form of a plus B Square is equal to a
squared plus 2 a B plus B squared
and I had X and I want to have something
which is twice so that's why I wrote X
is 2 times x times 1/2 that makes sense
and then I added and then I saw that so
that means X is a and B is 1/2 and then
I put B squared which is 1/2 squared
which I also introduced from the other
side complete in square that's right
that's right that's all that's all it is
so I'm not cheating is all it's a
legitimate but yeah but this check we
know because sometimes I could make a
mistake it works out so that's the
equation we get and now we can draw it
because you see of course we're more
familiar we are more familiar with the
core of x squared plus y squared is 1/2
squared that curve is the circle of
course the radius 1/2 let me make it
bigger
one half what's the difference between
this equation and this equation
we just shift by one half right so what
does it mean geometrically dramatically
it means that we shifted to the right by
one by one-half Y to the right because
for example here the point with X equal
zero will correspond to the point with X
equal 1/2 so that this whole thing would
become zero so shifting X by minus 1/2
means shifting everything to the right
by 1/2 and when we shift everything to
the right by 1/2 it means that the
center of the circle which used to be
the origin now becomes this point
whereas this point now becomes this
point and so it's actually circle which
looks like this ok so so this is the
circle which repeats which is
represented by this equation which kind
of neat because if you want to write it
in Cartesian coordinates you get this
equation which is not too bad but
certainly this looks much more
economical in some sense and so for the
purposes of some calculations it could
be very useful ok what else can we do
[Applause]
let's do a small let's do a small
variation on this problem so that would
be number four a small variation would
be R equals cosine of two theta so see
now we can't get away we can't really
get away with a simple formula for it
because here we use the fact that cosine
theta had such a nice expression you can
still try cosine theta is cosine squared
of theta minus sine squared of theta so
then you can rewrite cosine squared and
sine squared but you'll get something
really complicated so when you get to
station like this where you can't really
rewrite it in a nice way by using the
Cartesian coordinate system you need to
try to just kind of understand
qualitatively what this curve looks like
and to do that we we should look at this
equation as if R and theta were
Cartesian coordinates in some other
world are in theta Cartesian coordinates
R a so I'll kind of end in a pink world
in a pink world it will be like
Cartesian coordinates right so we'll
just draw theta and r and we'll draw
this graph in R and theta and then we'll
try to see what it means in our world
should like heal the world for now okay
so so what this look what this is is
just it's a cosine function except the
period of the cosine function is now
shrunk to PI instead of 2pi right
because already one theta is PI you get
cosine of two pi into your back so go
back to square one back to zero so
cosine looks like looks like this at 0
its 1 and then it becomes 0 at PI over 2
and becomes negative 1 then it becomes 0
at 3pi over over 2 and then it goes back
to 1 head at 2 pi and then it continues
like this right but now we have to
realize that normally if it were just
cosine function normally if it were
cosine theta this would be PI over 2 but
because it's 2 theta is going to be PI
over 4 and this will be PI over normally
it would be PI but now it's PI over 2
and this is like 3 PI over 4 this is PI
and then it continues like this so for
example at 5 5 5 PI over 4 is going to
reach 0 again and so on and now we would
like to plot this in on the plane on the
where R and theta are polar coordinates
at least qualitatively to get sort of
quotes of understanding what that looks
like so we just have to see what the
points here correspond to on this on
this picture the first point is the
point 1 when theta is 0 and R is 1 right
so it is point in which R is 1 and theta
is 0 let's plot it on this graph now on
this plane so faith
a theta is zero which means that we are
on the x-axis all points on the x-axis
have theta equals zero right because I
remember theta is supposed to be the
angle with the x-axis so you say the
zero it means you are on the on the
x-axis so you are on the x-axis and the
distance is one so you start here that's
your point or even let's make it nice
and let's start here that's our point
that's one what happens next what
happens next is we are we are increasing
the angle from zero to PI over four what
is PI over four PI over four answer this
bisector that's PI over four so when we
reach PI over four R becomes zero R
becomes 0 and R equals zero no matter
what data is is as we discussed the
origin so we start here and then the
angle should increase should go we
should go from theta equals 0 to theta
equals PI over 4 but at the same time R
is going to decrease until it becomes 0
so this is going to look like this
roughly because because what else can it
look like you see that's the point I
mean it's a quality quality picture I'm
not insisting that I I know exactly
there is there is no other way to
represent it by this if you try to write
it in terms of Cartesian coordinates
you're getting nowhere you're going to
get the complicate expression which is
not going to help you so we can only
studied called actively and that's what
it looks like and now we continue but
see what happens now is that R is a
theta sorry theta goes from PI over 4 to
PI over 2 but R becomes negative that's
where our rule becomes really handy
because if we were how should I say too
rigid and said no R has to be positive
and we don't accept any negative values
we would say we would have to say that
this part is not acceptable you can only
look at the picture in this range and
this range and so but not here
and what this would mean is that we
would not be able to draw some represent
some very nice pictures by using polar
coordinates
because we've been flexible and we said
we will accept negative arts but
following a particular rule which
discussed then we'll be able to actually
draw the whole thing and so what this is
going to look like is that now by it's
supposed to go from PI over 4 to PI over
2 but R becomes negative our becoming
negative means that we take the absolute
value of R but we shift the angle by PI
so that means that in the next segment
on this on this segment on this segment
we look at theta from PI over 4 plus PI
to PI over 2 plus y right so where is
that this is PI over 4 PI over 2 PI over
5 over 4 plus PI is this right and PI
over 2 plus PI is this so let's go and
and it's going to go in such a way that
our it's going to go to 1 again to make
it well 2 negative 1 but now we have to
take the absolute value so it's going to
delete this now it becomes positive also
it still stays negative and it continues
to 3 PI over 4 and that's that's like
this so see this segment is this this
segment is to this segment is this and I
think now you can probably already guess
what
what is going to look like it's going to
be like this
that's right like this then it goes like
this huh not so better all right like
this a good thing good to chew on over
the long weekend so there is one more
thing which we which we need to discuss
which is the formula for the surface
area for polar curves but it's fairly
it's fairly straightforward I'll just
I'll just write the answer
hold on folder we still have three
minutes okay so
the formula for the area which is 1/2 R
squared D theta
that's for 4 that's 4 for a picture
which you get by taking a segment by
taking a sector in a on the plane which
is bounded by the curve and by the line
theta equals alpha and theta equals but
later the way you derive this formula is
exactly the same what you need to know
is the same as the method which we use
to understand arc length and revolution
surface areas for equilibrium for
surfaces of revolution and the method is
to break it into small sectors and
evaluate the approximate area of which
small sector and that's something you
can read about in the book it's very
straightforward now I want to end with
two announcements to announcement first
announcement is that as you know the
first homework assignment is due on
Wednesday because Monday's Labor Day you
turn your homework to your in at at your
sections to your GSI through your TAS
all right on Wednesday now on Wednesday
Wednesday night after all the sections
are over I will post the solutions to
all the homework problems in this set on
the beach page page online ok that's the
first announcement and the second
announcement about my office hours
normally my office are supposed to be in
my office in Evans Hall but I think
we're lucky that there is nobody at
least Anila in the first two lectures
after the first two lectures there was
nobody here so we'll just hold office
hours here in this room from 5:00 to
6:30 all right
so I like to go have a good weekend